Understandably it was Indiana University which had had since post-World War II a counseling service.
It started really because of the VA benefits that was the need for that and so that was a very established center so a lot of my
thoughts and ideas came out of that one because that was a Big Ten school and it was a large center and it provided a model.
Plus then what I had experienced then moving into an administrative position with a smaller staff at East Texas.
Those two, but primarily Indiana University was the guidance.
How did you become well acquainted with Texas A&M for better or for worse?
I remember my remembrance of A&M had been principally watching the football game against University of Texas.
And I had heard of the Corps of Cadets tangently, and I'd heard of the school spirit tangently, but not seriously, because I'll be honest, when I came to Texas, I was planning to just spend a few years here and get back to Florida.
And that was 30 years ago.
So really, it was mostly through the football game.
And then I heard John talk about how if he could have another position in student affairs,
A&M was where he wanted to be because of the quality of the kids that he had met from A&M.
Alright, and then did you do any homework to learn about it?
No, I really honestly didn't.
I frankly didn't.
All I was, again, tipped off by these outsiders that it's a conservative environment.
You better check it out.
Make sure you're comfortable there because it's a different kind of place.
And that's why I did the thing of stopping people with mustaches and beards and seeing if they were being harassed.
And you got here what time of the year?
Got here, reported here on August 1st, 1974.
And I'm sure it was nice and cool.
Oh, yeah.
What kind of housing did you find?
I was single at that point and I found I lived in like I guess it's still Briar Oaks across from the shopping center.
I quickly decided I was leaving there because the morning of the Texas Tech game at 6 a.m.
some Aggie got out there and started blowing the bugle at 6 a.m.
and I decided I need to be in a more mature adult place so I went out to the Oaks way out on a 2818 the West Bypass which was off the shuttle bus route.
I was advised that that was a good way to
to try to find more adult people to live with.
Describe what it was like as a new resident of this area.
How did you get into the community, make friends, and so forth?
I remember it as being somewhat difficult the first six months.
The thing that got me integrated here and made me begin feeling rooted
was I was teaching in the Department of Educational Psychology and met a number of faculty over there, and we all happened to like softball.
And we got up a team.
And prior to that, I had been going back to Commerce about every third or fourth weekend because Commerce had just an interesting culture of its own.
And I know John used to talk with me about, Wade, you really need to be cutting back on those ties up there.
You know, and he was right in establishing relationships here.
But honest to goodness, it was through softball, and that sounds crazy.
Who were some of the first key friends you made?
Michael Ash, who was, he at one time, I think, he was assistant dean of the College of Ed for a while, and I think head of the department at some point.
He's been here a long time.
Yeah, Mike Ash, Bill Nash, Dick McGill, who's subsequently gone to LSU as a professor.
Tom Petras was in educational curriculum and instruction.
Yeah, those were probably the early, plus people in student affairs.
And what were some of the first important campus activities you remember attending that fall?
Oh, right away to a football game.
And I remember vividly, I didn't have anything maroon when I came here.
And I remember going to the first ball, I bought season tickets right away.
I remember going to the first ball game and it was a little cool, it was, for that time of year it was
or maybe this was about the third game of the year.
There was a little cool snap.
And I only had a Florida State jacket, which was dark, almost a maroon.
And I remember sort of folding the lapel over to cover up the Florida State, but it was the right color.
And I remember John Koldis introducing me to Margaret Rudder, and I remember holding that flap...
Dearly.
So, you know, that I wouldn't seem disloyal.
I just didn't have anything else maroon at that point, you know.
That was one of the things I really did.
I went to Silver Taps.
What was your impression?
Several times.
Oh, I just took my breath away.
That that kind of reverence was displayed for fellow students, fellow Aggies and that.
I'd never seen anything like that.
I'm asking what I don't mean to sound like a goofy question, but I bet it is.
For you as a professional counselor,
What value does that kind of an event have?
Haskell, I'm thoroughly convinced that part of the reason that we have a low suicide rate here is the kind of caring that A&M people have for each other.
The culture clearly supports that.
tend to watch out for each other.
I hate to pick out a school like Wayne State University in Detroit, but I can't imagine a large urban commuter institution having that support base.
Those are the conditions under which people get lost and do kill themselves.
Just here in the counseling service, the thousands of students that have been brought here by a fellow student because they're worried about them,
I'm convinced that that camaraderie and that caring is... So not only is it a fine tradition, it is also a very healthy... Oh, yeah.
And it's interesting, you know, just leaping forward to the bonfire tragedy, it's like a double-edged sword.
You have the tremendous support which students displayed for each other.
On the other hand, because everyone is so close, when you do have pain, I think it is even much deeper.
But then again, you have the counterbalancing support that's much stronger to help you get you out of that pain.
Right, so you went to TAPS.
What else did you do?
Oh, I went to midnight Yale practice and couldn't believe some of the grody stories.
That was sort of the direct opposite of the Silver TAPS experience.
Wow, these are some stories.
I laughed at them, but there was some story.
What about the football game?
Yeah.
You knew something about athletic traditions.
Yes.
What about here compared to... Well, I noticed how orchestrated everything was.
That was the first thing that jumped out at me.
And I quickly thought, of course, being an old history major, I guess you might think this way, but I thought...
how wonderful it was that an 80-year-old guy could come back to a football game, and when the yell leaders gave a hand signal, they knew what the cheer was.
Whereas at Florida State and Indiana, cheers come and go.
And here, and gosh, I think that threat is so important.
I really do.
Now, I will also say, while I was very positive about all these things, I did feel the conservatism, and it felt...
There was a downside of that, too.
When I went to Florida State and Indiana, nobody ever got up in my face and said, well, you're a Hoosier now, you know, by God.
Those were more live and let live campuses.
Here it was either, you know, you're going to be or you're going to be outside.
And so some of that, little of that was negative to me, but overwhelmingly it's very positive.
All right, then as you go to the office, describe some of the experiences, some of the realities you began to encounter that helped you to understand what the task here was going to be like.
Yeah.
Well, you know, the first thing is kind of mild in the sense that college students are college students are college students.
A lot of the things that students were presenting us with were not too different from the other campuses other than the anxiety and stress and sometimes depression from academic competition I thought were a little more severe here.
The kids were competing.
I mean, I heard stories of people stealing somebody else's notes to prevent them from setting the curve in the class and that level of competitiveness, you know.
So a lot of the, even today, a lot of the problems, relationship problems with mom and dad, roommates, boyfriend, girlfriend, problems with professors, tend to seem to be universal and unending.
But I sort of felt that some of the academic competition, the competitiveness, was somewhat...
more exaggerated here.
I noticed or I perceived a difference like in student drinking profiles at Indiana University.
People would go to the college bars and you know, but I quickly became aware that Thursday night was a big thing here.
It was like the drinking episode spiked and people really blew off steam and let it go.
Whereas I hadn't been aware of that on the other campuses I had worked on, so that was a little different.
Nationwide, and we saw it here too, students have been bringing increasing degrees of psychopathology with them.
Most of us in the business attribute it to the unhealthy family.
If you could cure one thing that would put us out of business, it would be a healthier mom and dad and family situation.
So we began seeing the advent of more serious psychopathology, people who already had a history of psychiatric care.
There were marital, I mean, there were some people sleeping around with each other.
I remember one case, we had the diagram who was sleeping with who.
It got very entangled and meshed.
It was hard to ferret out.
Now, I'm assuming that in the 70s, drugs were seldom, if ever,
a reality then.
Yeah, they were not as prominent at all.
And I mean, overconsumption of beer here at A&M always has been an issue of concern.
But yeah, but the other illicit drugs were not as big a deal.
That's right.
And surely there must have been some trademark goofy, Aggie-only realities you encountered early.
Well, I was...
I happened to have been in a fraternity, so I was a little taken back when it was such an anti-fraternity sentiment.
I remember in the first football games I went to, the Sigma Phi Epsilon would hang a banner over and the campus police would quickly come and snatch that banner.
And I remember my own national fraternity when they found out I came to A&M, which was considered a plumb of an institution to try to colonize.
and them writing to me and saying, can't you do anything?
Can't you get started?
And the first couple of years I was here, I said, hey, the environment here is not conducive to this kind of thing.
What's yours?
Huh?
What is yours?
Pi Kappa Phi.
Yeah, which is a southern fraternity, southern roots.
And so I dissuaded them for a while.
They finally got a Presbyterian minister who was Pi Kappa Phi here to
to start going and then I worked along with him and was an advisor for 15 years.
But I remember that was very different.
What was the, as far as you could tell, what was the campus leadership opinion about Greek organizations when you first got here?
Early on?
Oh, I think it was at best neutral and clearly pretty negative.
Yeah, and I really, you know, from the perspective of the culture of A&M, you know, it makes sense.
I can understand that.
Did you, in those early experiences, did you have many Corps members come over for advising?
Yeah, we did.
And, of course, the military and psychology have always had an uneasy relationship.
And...
But, yes, we did get cadets who were sometimes brought over by their fellow cadets, which was, you know, I was astoundingly positive.
Others who would come here and look both ways before they would come into the Y building or later here.
But, yeah, they definitely did.
We had a satellite office once over in the cadet corps area, but that did not pan out.
That was too close for them to be seen.
And, you know, military, even I have good friends in the Air Force, and
And the enlisted people make use of psychological services, but the officers do not because it's going to go down on their record.
So that was much the same thing that I think the fear here was.
But you haven't mentioned any of these that were almost like, I know you're not going to believe this, but here's early on.
Oh, well, you know, honestly, the thing that I, when I got here, the Aggie women don't get pregnant, and here's a weird kid who can't study, you know, concentrate on something because he broke up with his girlfriend.
Those blew me away because, you know, whenever you're in one business and the lay public says something to you, you know, I'm sure I do the same thing.
But those things just captured my attention just initially.
I mean, A&M just was not psychologically minded at that time and was barely ready to have people like us come on campus.
And you had to always let them know that the thing we were trying to do was help these kids graduate.
That's why we were here, not to just do counseling.
We wanted to see them get the degree that they came here to get.
And that was our whole reason for being.
So you really had to lay on that heavily.
No, I mean those kinds of initial comments and experiences and then
And then looking at some of the traditions, both extremely positive and then some of the negative part of feeling like, boy, you better be part of this or you're an outsider.
Highway 6 runs both ways.
And I think A&M, my reflection is A&M still has an extremely strong value system.
But I think it's more tolerant and accepting of outsiders.
And, you know, I have to think that's very good.
I really do.
And did you ever, in those early months, have any feeling, uh-oh, I made a mistake, I'm in the wrong place?
No.
So you felt good about it?
Yeah, I felt it quickly became evident to me that at this university, it's esprit de corps,
And it's fiscal underpinning that anything was possible at A&M.
And when you're at East Texas State, things are not possible.
And during those early months, who were the people that gave you pats on the back, encouragement, and so forth?
Who were the... Coldus, obviously.
Coldus' style was...
I noticed it with any new department he'd really focus on you that first year or so and get positions to you and get you off and running and then he'd sort of let you go and he'd move on to a new person.
So John was absolutely the key individual.
Got a good amount of support from residence life people, from Toby Reeves, the former dean of women.
She was very psychologically minded and
And I think it was more Residence Life and the Department of Student Affairs where you got most of your support from, because they were also making a lot of referrals to you too.
They had been among the groups that had been hurting here on campus when there was no personal counseling service.
And by the way, that reminds me, in 73 when John asked me to write that proposal, I do know, and I think I still have the documents,
There was a student government committee that petitioned the university for the development of counseling services.
And at the same time, there was a quasi-faculty staff committee that also requested that the institution develop these.
So it was a convergence of faculty, staff, and student requests upon Coldest coming here that also motivated John, in addition to his own personal experience.
As you proceeded then, you didn't run into any obstacles, big obstacles, to your being able to carry out the plan that you had written in the first place.
Yes, no, no.
A&M, the people, I mean, I don't, Lord knows, I'll never know what people said privately or, you know, out of my earshot or what, but I never...
I never was involved in a conversation where somebody implied or told me directly, hey, you need to put a cap on that service, you need to stop this.
I never, never had that happen to me in Texas A&M.
So you're saying no regent, no politician?
Nope.
John Coldis used to advise us in the Division of Student Affairs to be very careful of Board of Regents members, people with power, that they could co-opt you very quickly.
And they were people of power, and you better be very careful.
His thing was, let me handle those politics.
You keep your nose clean.
And I didn't have any problem following that guidance.
So I was never... There were a couple of occasions where a board member would call,
And I remember several of the presidents telling us that whenever that happened they wanted a report of it.
I remember reporting once to Bill Mobley that a board member had contacted us with some request.
And I understood the president's concern because board members had a habit of
reaching down into the system instead of going through it.
Was the board member trying to determine policy in that case?
No, more concern about the care of a particular student.
Yeah, it was really a very, a rather benign request.
Information.
Yes, right.
And as you perceived your task when you arrived, there were no fires to be extinguished.
There were no problems to be overcome.
It was to begin.
That's right.
Exactly.
Yeah, it was a very positive way.
I mean, I've often thought that you would have had to have screwed up badly to mess this opportunity up.
Yeah, all of the... It was just...
It seemed to me like it was just the right time for everything to start.
The institution was, there was, because of the student group that I mentioned and that faculty staff committee, there was a growing awareness that A&M was behind in this area, needed this.
And then with the spirit here and the traditions and the institution being so solid, it was just like all the forces were converging at the right time.
I know even at the College of Education, when I went to my first faculty meeting,
I was just so taken by, and this, I guess, is part of Earl Rutter's legacy, the new faculty coming in from, you know, I was from Indiana University, there's one from UCLA, Michigan State, Penn State.
I mean, all of a sudden, it was like A&M's doors were being thrown open.
And one of the things that I always tell people who don't know A&M is,
I think it is amazing how this university has retained its essential value system while also opening its doors and letting in disparate groups that they didn't used to serve.
And to me, it's an incredible process over the 27 years I've been here.
Remarkable.
And during those early years, the enrollment, of course, is almost exploding.
Right, right.
How did you kind of measure progress in those early years?
What made you think that you were moving forward and getting things done?
One of the things is just the fact of who's showing up at your door.
And it didn't take too long before we were on, quote, waiting lists.
And that was always very distressing as a young director.
I used to even go home and think about that.
How do we, I mean, we knew we were wedded to the idea that A&M is not a state mental health facility, that our role was to provide short-term developmental counseling and to intervene in crises to protect life.
And yet we began, because of the staff,
we began getting so many students coming that pretty soon we were hitting the waiting list and we'd have to say to, unless it was an emergency, we'll see you a week from now, but we can't see you today or tomorrow.
And so you, and I had, when I was director at East Texas State, I had three faculty from the counseling department were half-time in there and they were not particularly very good, I didn't think.
And you can see it in your, just your numbers.
The kids, they vote.
by coming or not coming.
And here with the staff we had, they immediately started coming.
And describe typical student numbers, the typical interview, the counseling sessions.
Yeah, sure.
Counseling services on large university campuses like this
Typically, and this is going to sound paltry, but typically you'll see about 10% of the student body, which people say, gee, only 4,000 students a year.
Well, yeah.
But that's pretty typical for any large university.
And this center is one of what we call the big 20 centers in the country now.
It was not anything prior to this.
I'm digressing just for a moment.
I had gone to our national organizations, the Association of University and College Counseling Center Directors, and I had been there for three years representing East Texas State, and then I came from A&M, and people knew me, of course, but were surprised to see me with a different institutional affiliation, and a few of them were aware of Texas A&M, but nobody from A&M had ever gone to those meetings and that, so that's another example of A&M
you know, through a number of us began really striking out nationally.
I think your question was about how we knew that we were doing was on target.
Yeah.
The other thing we began getting was more referrals from faculty and staff.
And typically if you're not serving people very well, they're not going to send them back.
In those days we had a little thank you for the referral form.
which psychology laws, confidentiality laws, put a kibosh on later.
But we used to send faculty and staff a thank you note and that John Jones made it to us.
Thank you for the referral.
And that kind of communication helped a lot.
So the numbers of students coming in, the number of referrals from all over the institution,
was another really good sign.
And then you get the thank you notes.
And you know when you get a kid who comes in and they're talking suicide and you start working with them and they never do it.
Or if they've made an attempt, they never do it again.
And so you have that data.
You have that case data.
Make me believe that I had no idea of what a typical counseling session is like.
Sure.
Typical individual counseling.
Typically, most students will see a counselor or psychologist once a week.
It's about a 50-minute hour, or it should be.
That's to give staff time to write some case notes, which are required by law, too.
Some of us, though, are so humanistic that we run right up to the hour, and then we see the next student, and then we get behind it.
But we'll do that.
The initial session is typically one of, I usually will pass some time a day with a person just momentarily to give them a feel of me.
But then fairly quickly ask them if they can begin talking about what it is that brought them in.
And usually, I think most of us are very careful to be very intent listeners in the beginning.
You're trying to put the person at ease because they're beginning to self-disclose.
And that's scary.
In fact, I have learned in my life that some people become very adept at self-disclosing too much too quickly, and you never see them again after the first session because they become psychologically naked and they're embarrassed to come back.
A few students, you've got to almost hold them and slow them down.
But most of them you've got to encourage.
And, I mean, it's even like our style of dress.
Now, I typically wear a shirt and tie because I'm administrative.
but our male psychologists will dress in slacks and a polo shirt and that, and that's to try to cut down the formality and the superior-subordinate relationship.
And it's a matter of listening intently.
It's a matter of also reflecting, feeling back as you begin to pick up feelings of whatever the emotion is, a flat affect, anger.
anxiety, depression, trying to put those things in words and also restating the content of what they've said, kind of parroting back to them in slightly different words what they're kind of saying to you to check on whether you're receiving those messages correctly.
And that's very powerful because it makes the person feel understood and it allows them to go deeper and deeper into what their thoughts and feelings are.
And that's the first session.
You're really trying to build a lot of rapport, a good working alliance, a working relationship with people.
And then usually at the end of that session, we typically are assessing whether, and this is going back to Jack Williams, whether or not we are the appropriate place for them.
Because we will get people in here who need a good year or two of psychotherapy.
People are trained to do it, but that's not A&M's function.
And so if they're going to be a long-term client, then we're immediately assessing in that first interview, sometimes in two interviews, with the idea of referring out.
If not, if they are appropriate for the service, then you're starting to create a game plan.
And we like to keep clients working.
Sometimes there's homework, reading things, talking to other people...
And so we actually begin to talk about what we're going to do in the next session.
Always try in a session to summarize it at the end.
Say, now, what we've talked about today is da-da-da-da-da-da, and you're feeling that, and you're kind of thinking about these options of solving this problem, and okay, so we sort of tie it up in a bow at the end of a session.
And normally, particularly then, in the early years, the work day began at about what?
It began at 8 o'clock.
It was the university schedule we followed.
Clients, typically we saw student clients beginning about 8.30.
Okay.
Yeah.
And they were scheduled about one an hour?
Yeah, one an hour.
The maximum that we asked staff to do was five hours a day of direct service.
direct counseling service.
That would either be individual counseling.
I didn't mention group counseling.
That's a little different.
And then all of us serve a portion of our time each week on emergency duty.
We have a couple of people who are unscheduled and we just wait for students to walk in and they typically are used every single day.
Now emergency, we don't define what an emergency is.
We allow the student to define it.
I had a young man
who came in late on a Friday afternoon, high anxiety, and I thought, well, I've got depression or suicidal ideation here.
He had a big date that weekend.
He had asked his parents for 20 bucks.
They had refused, and he was in deep trouble, and he was grief-stricken over that.
That's not my definition of an emergency, but to him it was, and so when a student tells us that,
We take it deadly seriously.
We let the students define what the emergency is.
Are you at liberty to say what the advice was to that young man?
Honestly, it's so long ago, Askel, I can't remember.
I just remember when the secretary came in and said, this young man is shaking, he's anxiety ridden.
I thought, uh-oh, uh-oh.
In fact, I was getting ready to call Claude Goswick and say,
Claude, I may need to bring somebody over here.
We may need to put them in over the weekend.
I had all these thoughts of getting all of these practical things in motion, and then he hits me with the... And I'm assuming that even in that kind of situation, it is inappropriate professionally to solve the problem by laughing.
Yes, that is correct.
I chuckled internally, having some years on my odometer, but also this must have been quite a woman because he was trying to impress her and he was in bad shape.
In those early years, did the students that you all assisted, were they comparatively a cross-section of the student body, male, female?
uh traditionally in in the beginning they the males probably outnumbered the females because we had so few women but but i was meaning in terms of the per capita percentages yeah uh still i think in the early years because see when i came here a m was 21 500 but there were only 900 women yeah
So they vastly, you know, the males vastly outnumbered.
It didn't take very long, which is true in general in society.
Women use counseling services much more than men.
Oh, really?
Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Gender-wise, they do.
And it didn't take very long in my history at A&M to begin to see those numbers and percentages reflected.